[music]
>> Bloomberg Audio Studios podcasts, radio,
news.
>> [music]
>> Hello and welcome to another episode of
the Odd Lots podcast. [music] I'm Joe
Weisenthal. And I'm Tracy Alloway. So
Tracy, one of the things that we've been
talking about a fair amount
everyone's talking about it, I guess is
how the biggest, most profitable
companies in America, they're still
really big, they're still really
profitable, but they've switched from
being throwing off tons of free cash
flow to big investors spending a lot of
money. Yeah, that's right. So we've had
years and years and years of big tech
basically
I guess generating infinite amounts of
cash it feels like. Uh and now they're
switching to actually spending some of
that cash to build very expensive data
centers and things like that. And you're
right, it is kind of a change for the
market.
>> Yeah. Right? Like we haven't seen that
scale of investment for a very long
time. Certainly not I don't think in our
lifetimes, have we? I don't know. No, I
it doesn't feel like it. I mean
you know, I guess maybe we'll get into
this in the conversation. You know, I
think if you go back to like pre-GFC era
when a lot of the really big companies
in the index were like, you know, Exxon
was the biggest company in the world for
a long time. So they would have always
been having to like spend because you
can't just sort of like passively
collect oil etc. But
it does seem generally true that the big
theme both with financials and tech is
this incredible ability to generate huge
returns with fairly modest capital
outlays whether we're talking about
equipment, plants, or even human labor.
Well, the other big switch is just, you
know, if you look at it just at the tech
sector basically which has been, you
know, the dominant force in our equity
markets for a while now. But for much of
the 2000s the investment was in sort of
like intangible
>> Yeah. you know, SaaS type stuff. And now
we're switching to really like brick and
mortar. They're paying to build energy
capacity and they're paying for actual
chips and actual buildings to house a
bunch of air conditioners and servers
and all of that. No, it's it's totally
true. This is the big theme, right, is
just this. So the question is like,
okay, they're still making a ton of
money, they're still very profitable.
And maybe these these investments will
pay off in a massive way at some point
down the future. But can investors
expect the same level of returns that
they've seen in the past if there's this
big switch in terms of strategic
decision-making in terms of capital
outlays and so forth, taking on debt?
What does this mean for the markets?
What does this mean for investors? And I
don't know the answer, but maybe our
guest Well, also, I mean you and I, I
think for the past 20 years we have all
gotten very used to everyone saying that
the tech sector is overvalued, right?
Like even as it throws off infinite
amounts of cash, everyone is like,
"Ah, so overvalued. The market's at a
top. The market's at a top." That has
been the case for pretty much like my
entire mature investing age lifetime.
Right. And so you bring up a really
another important dimension of this
which is just that valuations by
traditional metric I mean I remember,
you know, early on what was it the
Shiller the Shiller CAPE ratio and
there's like [clears throat]
there's like this has got to mean
revert. It this is we're at the 98th
percentile of historical valuation and
it keeps going up and so forth.
>> Mean reversion is always around the
corner, Joe. It's it's It's always it's
always coming mean reversion.
>> But no, this is another question. Why
didn't it mean revert, right? And why
have just the multiples that we've seen
on traditional price-to-earnings ratios,
you look at them, they make you go crazy
and they got to come down.
Why haven't they? Right.
>> That's an also an interesting question
that we need to get answers to even
beyond the specific capital question.
>> Yeah, let's do it. All right. Well, I'm
very excited to say we do have the
perfect guest today because we are
speaking to someone who's really done a
lot of research on some of these exact
questions including he published a paper
co-authored a recent paper that really
caught my eye back in January called a
macroeconomic perspective on stock
market valuation ratios.
So it's good that you you brought up the
earnings metrics. We're going to be
speaking with Jonathan Heathcote, one of
the co-authors of this paper. He's an
economist at the Minneapolis Fed. We're
going to talk all about this. So
Jonathan, thank you so much for coming
on Odd Lots.
Thanks a lot for having me. Yeah, I
should just say right at the start I'm I
should give a disclaimer. I'm a
economist at the Federal Reserve Bank of
Minneapolis and
anything I say is going to be my views,
not those of the Federal Reserve Bank of
Minneapolis or the Federal Reserve
System.
Thank you for getting the disclaimer out
of the way. We are very used to hearing
that from Fed researchers and
economists. So the title of the paper, I
think Joe already said it, a
macroeconomic perspective on stock
market valuation ratios. Why did you
decide to look at this particular topic
at this particular moment in time, too?
Yeah, so I actually we started out
before we worked on this, we were
working on a paper on the US net foreign
asset position and and we noticed that
you know, the value of US assets minus
our liabilities, that had been declining
really fast over the last 10 years.
And
historically people had mostly thought
about that in terms of the US running
big current account deficits, running up
a bigger and bigger
debt with the rest of the world.
>> Mhm. [clears throat]
And we realized that the kind of
international gross asset positions had
gotten really big and a lot of the
decline in the net foreign asset
position was driven by the fact that
foreigners had invested a lot in US
equity markets and a lot of foreign
direct investment into the US.
And when the US markets were booming
much more so than the rest of the world,
that was driving up the value of these
foreign investments in the US and that
was driving down the US net foreign
asset position. And so after that we
kind of became more interested in trying
to understand what's driving valuations
more generally. I mean our background's
not really we're not really in finance,
we're sort of more macro economists, but
we've been working on this for a few
years now and that's where this paper
started. This seems like a bit just from
a sort of theoretical big picture
perspective this link between sort of
macroeconomics
and stock markets. And it does feel like
often these are worlds that talk past
each other and the macro people aren't
talking about stock market valuations
that much and stock market people they
think they don't even have to care about
macroeconomics in many cases. But this
strikes me as interesting. How like
novel is this or talk to us about this
attempt to bridge the gap between the
two worlds here? Yeah.
I think there's a lot of strong
connections and we're talking about the
same things in in in a slightly
different frame. So one thing
macroeconomists have been talking about
for a long time for example is the fact
that
it looks like labor share of output has
been drifting down over time. So a
larger share of the pie seems to be
going to owners of firms and a smaller
share as
wages to workers.
And obviously that ties directly into
thinking about valuations. If the firms
making bigger profits, that's going to
drive up valuation. So I think there's a
lot of connections. I think for a long
time historically
there was a sense that it was kind of
really hard to understand valuations.
They were driven by wild variations in
risk premia that had not much to do with
kind of standard slow-moving macro
stuff. And so, you know, there were two
separate two separate camps, one
studying the finance, one studying the
macro and
and it was hard to connect them. But I
think, you know, I think people are
working on that and I think there's a
lot of connections.
Okay, well, let's dive into the paper's
conclusion then because I think everyone
when when we talk about high valuations,
the temptation is always to be like,
"No,
the people who are satisfied with these
high valuations, like they're the crazy
ones, right?
>> Right. Like I'm the one that sees the
truth." But your paper actually sets out
like a pretty reasonable explanation for
why these high valuations have persisted
and have not mean reverted as Joe
mentioned. Talk to us about both
I guess the labor component in your
paper as well as the investment
component.
Yeah, sure. So you know, I think Joe was
mentioning a minute ago with the
price-earnings ratio, that's the sort of
a classic valuation metric people have
looked at for a long time.
And the idea always was that, well, if
prices get too far ahead of profits,
then
maybe that gap's going to narrow again
going forward. So either you're going to
have to have really fast growth in
earnings or the prices are going to come
down. So you're going to get low
returns.
And
people have looked at that ratio.
Shiller has a like the famous version of
it. And the problem is that it's been
drifting up and up the price-earnings
ratio and it's been kind of way above
its historical average for a long time
and that gap just seems to keep getting
bigger. So
so we were we were kind of went back to
that. We looked at it in in macro data
instead of financial data, but it looks
much the same if you look at standard
financial accounts.
And we went back to 1952. Yeah, you see
this big run up in in the price-earnings
ratio.
But you know, there are other metrics
you can look at. Another thing you can
look at is you can look at prices
relative to free cash flow.
And it's sort of a similar ratio. It's
just that you've got free cash flow in
the denominator. And the only difference
between earnings and free cash flow is
in measuring earnings you subtract a
measure of depreciation.
In measuring free cash flow instead of
subtracting depreciation, you take out
all capital expenditure.
And then the nice thing about free cash
flow is it's sort of a measure of
everything that's left at the end of the
day to to be paid to the owners of the
firm. So you take the sales of firms,
you subtract the input costs, payments
to labor, subtract their taxes, subtract
their capital expenditure.
Everything that's left is money that the
firm can pay out to its owners.
So if you look at that ratio, the value
of all the firms in the US relative to
the total cash flow they're generating
it bounces around a bunch over time.
But it doesn't have like a long a
long-term drift. It's not like it's kind
of systematically moving up over time.
So if you look at that ratio, you'd say,
"Ah, maybe the market's not so
overvalued today. Maybe prices are
roughly where they
you know, roughly within historical
range compared to this to this ratio."
This strikes me as very important and so
we should just pause on this point or
stick with this point for a second. So
we've all seen the Shiller CAPE and
various other versions. What you're
saying is if you just And I've always
thought, just let's just measure free
cash flow. That's all I care about if
I'm an investor, just how much money
comes back to me at the end of the day.
But you're saying that when you look at
the entire market through this lens, it
just does not have the same extreme
drift outside of normal ranges that you
see when you look at price-earnings
ratios.
Yeah, that's right. I mean, it bounces
around over time, but
if you look at where it was, say in
1980, so that was a low for stock
values. If you look at it in 1980, and
you look at it in the second quarter of
2022,
that ratio of value to free cash flow is
the same. And both both cases are is
about the historical average.
Now, if you look over the last 3 years,
you know, that ratio has kept moving up.
So now we are above the historical
average, but we're not wildly outside
the range that it's fluctuated in over
the last 60-70 [music] years.
>> [music]
[music]
>> And just going back to the labor and
investment component, if we think about
it very simplistically, I think you used
the pie analogy earlier. Like if you
think about that cash as a giant pie,
less of it is going to labor, less of it
has been going on investment, and more
of it is being spent or returned to
capital, i.e., the shareholders.
Yeah, that's right. So, if you look at
the price-earnings ratio, it's not like
earnings haven't grown. They've grown
pretty fast, and they've grown
pretty fast because the share of the
output that's going to workers has been
going down, and the share that's going
to owners of firms has been going up.
So, earnings have grown,
but cash flow has grown even faster, and
cash flow has grown even faster because
firms have been able to generate these
extra earnings without doing a lot of
extra investment.
I think what investors care about at the
end of the day, what they maybe ought to
care about is, you know, how much income
is actually they're going to be
receiving. And if firms are going to do
a a lot of investment to keep sustaining
those earnings, that's income that can't
go to the owners of the firm. But that
investment seems to to been relatively
weak over time, and as a share of firm
value has been declining.
So, cash flow has grown fast. Talk to us
about this measure of labor share.
Obviously, on an individual basis, for
an individual company basis, you can
just like,
you know, find out how much is going to
labor versus other things. At the
aggregate level, which is where you're
working at the macro level, this line,
and I've seen it for years, people talk
about labor share, and it's generally
going down. How robust is that measure?
How that single number, cuz it looks
pretty bad for workers when you look at
the long-term labor share trend. How
like methodologically or sort of
intellectually robust is is this data?
Yeah, I think it's something that
macroeconomists have been looking at for
a long time. I think it's pretty robust.
If you look at the corporate sector,
you could just measure it in the
national accounts. You can look at wages
and salaries of employees, and you can
compare that against the output of the
corporate sector,
and those wages and salaries
have fallen by about eight percentage
points since 1980, I think, from 1980 to
2022. So, that's eight percentage points
of GDP. That's a big change.
You know, if you look at the
non-corporate sector, you're looking at
small businesses, that's harder to
measure because kind of hard to say for
a small private business how much of
their output is really payments to labor
versus payments to capital, but
for big corporations, it's sort of
straightforward. There There is a There
is an extra You know, one wrinkle to
that, which is that
you know, some firms have been paying
more
They've been compensating some of their
workers with stock options and things
like that.
And so, that kind of complicates it a
little bit because, you know, do you
want to call that a payment to labor or
do you want to call that part of income
to capital? So, but putting that aside,
I think it is There is There has been a
big shift
with less income going to labor, more
income going
either to capital or just as pure rents
to the owners of firms. Wait, now I'm
really curious. In your own research,
how did you classify stock-based
compensation? Was that an increase in
labor or was that an increase in to
capital?
Yeah, we just follow the We just follow
basically the national accounts. So, the
Bureau of Economic Analysis and the flow
of funds, they put together this data
set called the Integrated Macroeconomic
Accounts. And it's really just a version
of the standard national income and
product accounts, and they classify
labor income the standard way, which is
wages and salaries. And I think they
include in that standard national income
measure,
when stock options are exercised, that
counts as part of wage wage income. But,
you know, when they're granted, that's
the You know, so there's some details
there, but
you know, they're supposed to be at
least partially captured there in that
wage income measure.
Okay, and on the investment side, what
about intangibles? Cuz this is the thing
that constantly comes up when we're
talking about both valuations and the
broader macroeconomy. So much of what
companies do nowadays, especially in big
tech,
has to do with intangibles. So, you
know, if ephemeral brand value and
things like that, would that have been
captured in that investment number?
Yeah, so they've changed a little bit
over time the way they try and measure
investment, and they're trying to
capture more of investment in
intellectual property, investment in
software, and stuff that wasn't
historically captured.
There's still a question about how well
they're capturing that, and how much of
it is measured.
But, in terms of measuring free cash
flow, one one reason we like the free
cash flow measure is that
in terms of the income that's available
to go to the owners of the firm,
it doesn't really matter whether that
spending on intangibles if that could be
counted as a purchase of an intermediate
input,
that subtracts from value added, or
could be counted as a capital
investment, then it's going to subtract
from investment. So, the free cash flow
measure is going to be the same either
way. So, I think that's a nice thing
about free cash flow. It is just a
measure of the income that's left over
after the firm's paid all its bills, and
it doesn't really matter whether you
count those bills as a as an input cost
or a capital expenditure. So,
I think, you know,
that's one advantage of looking at this
free cash flow measure.
So, when you embarked on this paper, how
much was it in the
with your thinking? You talked about the
intellectual origins of it with your
prior research, but how much was it
motivated or driven by this current
2026, or probably 2025 when you started
it, reality that there is a very big
change in corporate behavior afoot. We
don't know how long it's going to last,
but this is the big story of arguably
the last two to three years is how much
these very profitable companies have
seriously shifted into investment mode.
Yeah, I would say we weren't that We
were maybe a little behind on that. We
worked on this for a while. So, I think
you know, that's not something that was
particularly on our radar. We've We've
kind of
twigged onto that a little bit more
recently. Now, it's true that that that
investment on AI-centered investment by
the big tech firms, that's been booming.
Other kinds of investment
have been kind of weak. Residential
investment, for example, has been weak.
So, investment overall, yeah, it looks
kind of relatively strong for the whole
US economy, but it's not, you know,
outsized in in in aggregate. So,
yeah, I think it's definitely a
question.
I think, as you said right at the start,
this story that
firms have been able to generate a bunch
of earnings,
some of these firms that have generated
a bunch of earnings, especially in tech,
they've done it without a lot of capital
expenditure, and that's meant that their
cash flow has grown really strongly.
And now they are starting to spend. So,
it is a it is a question going forward,
is that spending going to, you know, is
it going to pay off? So, at the moment,
I guess, yeah, I guess there's a bunch
of companies whose cash flow temporarily
is negative right now. Yeah.
>> Historically, maybe free cash flow. And
so, that's the question investors are
thinking about.
>> [music]
[music]
>> How do you think about aggregates
versus, I guess, sectors or, you know, a
handful of big tech companies in this
data? Because, again, you're you are
looking at the aggregate numbers, like
the macro variables, but if we think
about the market right now and who's
actually spending money, it's like a
handful of tech firms, right?
Yeah, that's right. We have been mostly
looking at the aggregates. We've started
looking a little bit at the at firm
level data in Chris and Compustat.
And
you know, what you see What we've seen
so far looking at the firm level data is
that, yeah, it's a relatively small
number of firms that account for most of
the growth in value, most of the growth
in the total stock market value, maybe
say 50 firms.
But those 50 firms are the same firms
that have had the the fastest growth in
cash flow. So, cash flow and value have
grown roughly in lockstep for, say, 50
50 of the biggest firms in the US.
And so,
these I mean, I guess a bunch of these
are big tech firms, and it's these big
tech firms have been generating
mountains of cash, and their high
values, they're not built on sand,
they're not built on an expectation that
we're going to make big future profits.
The profits are there now.
And I guess the question is, you know,
are those profits going to persist going
forward?
Let's get back to the labor share
component. I mean, one of the things
that comes up is this question of like,
is the booming stock market based on the
perpetuation of inequality, right? To
some extent, like this idea you you
know, back in the 2010s, everyone all
these corporate leaders and people would
go to Davos, and they'd say, "Oh, we we
really care about inequality, right?"
You know, it sounds nice, etc. But also,
everyone wants the stock market to go
up. Seems if we tease this out a little
bit, that there is some tension, right?
Is there It seems like there's some
tension with if you actually had some
sort of meaningful shift in terms of the
ratio of profits that go from capital to
labor, if part of the story in your line
go up is the declining labor share, then
it does seem like there's pretty
obviously some fundamental tension here.
Yeah, so I think that, you know, if the
people who are owning the farms were the
same people who are earning the wage
income,
then, you know, it would just be a
reshuffling of income. You know, you'd
be getting less income in one pocket,
more income in your other pocket, and
that would be kind of a wash for
inequality, but
I guess the concern is that the people
who own a large part of the stock market
are one group of people, and then the
workers, you know, many workers don't
have a lot of that stock market wealth,
and so they don't benefit from these
higher stock prices. So, that that is a
concern, and I guess it's a concern
going forward to people
you know, thinking about AI, how that's
going to change labor markets going
forward, and how that's going to change
the pie, whether that's going to
reduce the share of the pie that's going
to workers still further, and increase
still further the share that's going to
owners of firms.
Actually, this reminds me of a related
question, but, you know, you're at the
Minneapolis Fed, and I assume when you
publish a research paper like this, you
want your bosses to look at it. I guess
that's Neil Kashkari right now. And you
want there to be some sort of policy
implication.
What exactly should policy makers take
away from something like this paper?
Because, you know, at the Fed, I'm sure
they care about wealth inequality, but
they don't have a wealth inequality
mandate. They do have a financial
stability mandate, so you know, you
could even make the argument that they
wouldn't want to unsettle
you know, current equity market
valuations, which would argue
potentially for not increasing labor
share of that cash flow. But, anyway,
when you publish a paper like this,
what are policy makers supposed to take
away, or what do you hope that they
actually take away?
I think that at the Fed, we do follow
equity markets, and we follow them
because
we sort of want to get a sense of those
headwinds and tailwinds for the economy,
and all else equal, if the stock market
is stronger, that's a little bit of a
bigger tailwind, and
higher stock prices, you'd expect a
little bit more consumer spending, a
little bit more business investment.
So, the Fed, for sure, we're kind of
interested in in understanding stock
markets. I think, you know, forecasting
forecasting stock prices is hard, and
we're we're we're not trading,
and it's hard to make money on that.
But, yeah, for sure, we're monitoring
that. And in terms of financial
stability, then yes, there's a concern
always like, you know, there's always a
risk that you worry one thing you worry
about is, well, maybe what would happen.
It's always kind of a scenario in the
background, what would happen if stock
prices fell. Not that it's in real time
ever going to be easy to predict that,
but
just hypothetically, you know, you want
to think through what might happen if
stock prices fell substantially, and and
stock prices now are really high. So,
you know, a 10% fall in prices when
prices are really high is going to be a
a larger fall in household wealth than a
10% fall when prices are low. So, so I
think all else equal, you know, the fact
that these valuations are so high, you
know, makes you think a little bit more
about about those downside risks. So,
going back to the question of these
cycles of capital expenditure, and you
mentioned, you know, we're in one now.
We'll see how long it lasts, and so
forth. In your research, what other
prior waves should we look at? You know,
you mentioned the trend since 1980, but
are there prior waves where you could
see, okay, the stock market valuations
on a free cash flow basis compressed,
or stocks just fell,
and there was some at the same time some
sort of some massive decrease in free
cash flow that we can point to that,
okay, this helps explain a decline or a
bear market or something like that.
Yeah, I think, you know, one thing that
was interesting, I looked back, there
was a paper it's an old paper now, but I
think it was published around 2000
by Hobijn and Jovanovic, [clears throat]
and they were
they were interested in why stock prices
were really low around 1980. Mhm.
And their story was, well,
in the late '70s, early '80s, people
could see that there was an IT
revolution coming, that the microchips
were out there, they could anticipate
they were going to be widely adopted,
and this was going to
be a big wave of investment, and it was
going to create a bunch of new winners.
>> Yeah, it was going to create a bunch of
new winners and losers in the economy.
And the idea of the paper was, well,
you know, some of these old firms are
going to get wiped out because they're
not going to be able to implement this
new IT. They're not They don't have the
technology, they don't know how to do
it. And there's going to be some new
firms that are going to come in, and
they did come in. You know, the Intels
and the Microsofts came in.
But,
at the time, you know, those were not
mostly publicly traded companies, and
nobody quite knew at the time, you know,
which were going to be the winners,
which were going to be the losers. But,
they had a a sense that this was going
to be a, you know, a radical
transformation. So, so that was the
story for that paper, for why prices
were low in the early 19 1980s. So, I
thought that was kind of that feels a
little bit like
you know, it's not exactly the same as
AI, but it's sort of like it was a big
change, people could see it coming, but
they just didn't know at the time
exactly how it was going to play out.
Yeah, definitely a historical echo
there. Conversely to Joe's question, I
mean, a lot of the paper is explaining
why if you look at valuations, they're
high, but, you know, macro sense, they,
you know, they might be quite rational.
Were there any moments throughout
history, I guess since I think you said
1952,
was it, the beginning of your data?
Were there any moments since 1952 where
actually valuations did just look really
irrational, and it was just, you know,
investors getting ahead of themselves,
and animal spirits going wild?
Yeah, well, I think, you know, an a
natural one for that would be the the
dot-com boom in 2000.
That That was a time when cash flow was
weak,
and yet valuations were sky-high. And,
you know, with hindsight,
investors did get ahead of themselves
then, and took a hit. You know, some of
those technologies they were excited
about, they actually, you know, with 10
years later, they they really did pay
off, and the market bounced back higher
than it had been, but you know, at the
time, I think that was a little bit of a
irrational exuberance. It does seem But,
it's hard to call it Yeah.
I mean, like I obviously I'm not going
to like put you on the spot, and say,
all right, give us your stock market
forecast for the next 5 years. We're not
We don't want to do that, either. All
that being said, it certainly seems like
an implication of this research is that
when you have a major switch that gets
flipped from we were just producing
mountains of cash, much of it returning
to shareholders, a lot of it in the form
of buybacks. When you have this switch
that gets flipped, where it's just tons
of free cash flow, and suddenly, not
only is that cash flow all being
redeployed into investment, but
furthermore, some of these companies are
going into debt, so negative cash flow,
perhaps. It seems like a safe
implication for investors today is at
least we should take this very
seriously. That there is a flip that's
underway, and if one explanation for
high stock market valuations is this
free cash flow, we have to take pretty
seriously the fact that for many of
these big companies, it's either gone to
zero or flipped negative.
Yeah, so we looked at We only, you know,
we looked at We were looking at
quarterly data. This macro data is only
quarterly, so we're a little bit, you
know, not totally up to date. The last
quarter we had was the third quarter of
2025.
If you look at the total corporate
sector then,
you know, cash flow is
you don't see a decline in cash flow up
until that third quarter. So, maybe
that's changed the last Once Once we get
the next quarter or two of data, we'll
see something different, but
you know, overall, I think in aggregate,
the economy is still generating a bunch
of free cash flow. So, it's true that,
you know, for some of these big tech
firms at the top, those numbers might be
different. I think, you know, the view
The optimistic view is, well, this is 1
or 2 years of investment that's going to
generate a ton of free cash flow going
forward, and
I think historically, that's why when
you're looking at individual companies,
maybe it makes sense to look at prices
compared to earnings instead of prices
compared to cash flow, because this
investment, if you have a period where
you're doing a ton of investment, you
know, this cash flow measure looks weak
for a quarter or two, and then it's
going to bounce back. And maybe earnings
is a way to smooth through that, but
you know, so for sure But, for sure
though, the outlook going forward is
going to depend on whether these
investments pay off.
I think you can make a case that this AI
is going to
reduce labor share of income further.
Right.
You know, so that would be a plus for
stock values.
On the other hand, I think this idea
that, you know, AI is kind of there for
free, that you can just adopt it and get
these bigger profits without any
investments, I think that's not going to
be quite right. I think I mean, you see
the big tech firms, they're definitely
doing plenty of capital expenditure. And
I think even average firms that are just
planning to adopt AI and increase
productivity, it's not like they can
just tell their workers, you know,
please
try and use ChatGPT, and be a little bit
more productive. They're going to have
to do big investments, too, to actually
adopt. So,
I think I don't have my my own view. I
wouldn't want to make a forecast, but I
think you can tell a glass half full,
glass half empty story on that. One
thing I feel confident, Tracy, is that,
you know,
you investors go back and they say,
well, look at all this free cash flow
companies are generating, these
valuation measures are totally robust.
And then we get to 2025, and they say,
well, look at these price to earnings
ratios. They Don't ignore the free cash
flow loss, and just switch back and PE
ratio. I think it'll be very comfortable
for strategists to sort of pick that
number.
Whatever makes it look tolerable at that
moment.
>> But, actually, Jonathan, so I
we really don't want to put you on the
spot and make you forecast the future.
But, it does seem like the current
moment in time, the AI boom could be a
very natural, you know, real-life
experiment for some of the factors you
point out in your paper. So, on the one
hand, you have a potential investment
boom. On the other hand, as you just
touched on, maybe firms, you know, save
even more on labor costs. Can you just
walk us through, like, broad brush
strokes, a hypothetical scenario where
companies spend a bunch on AI, and
reduce their labor costs, what would
that look like in your framework of
thinking about valuations?
Yeah, so
I think that what companies like would
like is just, you know, sort of like a
magic tree that just drops fruit and you
just keep generating cash flow without
doing any investment. And, you know,
some of the big tech companies, they did
important investments early on and maybe
we didn't measure those well at the
time, but they've been just just
machines generating cash without a lot
of capital expenditure. So, I think that
is the the optimistic view on on asset
valuations.
And
yeah, in terms of labor share, I think
looking back at over time, it was more a
story of people were thinking that it
was going to be the technology was going
to automate kind of low-skilled jobs and
we were going to have robots building
cars instead of workers. And that's
where the labor savings were going to
come from.
And now I think, you know, that's
flipped a little bit and now, you know,
the high-skilled workers are starting to
get a little bit nervous that maybe it's
going to be some of the knowledge
workers that are going to get replaced.
And it's going to be the people doing
kind of
manual work who are going to be
indispensable. But still the direction
would be the same that you can just do
the same amount of work and you can
replace workers with with either
machines or with AI.
And in terms of I guess inequality, we
were going back to that a second ago. I
think I think that's sort of an
interesting thing to think about cuz it
the old one seemed like, oh, this
technology is
bad for inequality because
it's competition for low-wage workers
and it's going to drive down wages of
low-wage workers
and that's going to be a mechanism
generating more inequality. Now, you
know, you could tell an optimistic story
on inequality. Well, now it's kind of
the high-wage workers whose jobs are at
risk. Yeah. And we're going to need
plenty of I like the old story.
I like those guys are going to do, you
know, those guys are going to the nurses
and the and the construction workers are
going to do fine and it's going to be
the the knowledge workers who are going
to take a hit. So, maybe that's going to
compress inequality a little bit, but
yeah. I like the version of compressing
inequality where people who got paid
less would make more than the one where
the knowledge workers
>> Yeah. It's shrink there. It's people
being pulled up Yeah. versus everyone
being pulled down story.
>> I guess I guess it's if you if we
prioritize reducing inequality, we have
to take it any way we can get it.
>> Jonathan, thank you so much for coming
on Odd Lots. I think this is really
important research and love to stay in
touch particularly as you continue to
follow on and do [music] more tests of
of your theory. Thanks a lot for having
me.
>> [music]
>> You know what, Tracy? I thought it was
actually it made me take the research
even more seriously when he said that
they didn't really stumble into this
because they were
cuz it was timely in the news right now.
>> Yeah.
>> And so the fact that they've sort of
arrived at this realization that a lot
of this can be explained by free cash
flows and investment at the exact moment
when this is all happening. It Like I
said, would I ever like want to like
forecast the stock market? Absolutely
not. But I think investors have to take
this pretty seriously as a potential
turning point here. I agree. Also, I'm
just I am very much in favor of keeping
it simple when it comes to valuation and
like free cash flow seems like it's not
necessarily forward-looking, but like it
seems like a pretty decent thing to be
looking at. And if you are just looking
at cash flow,
>> Yeah. then the idea that suddenly a lot
of that is going to be spent on a data
center buildout or something like that,
like that would seem to change the
equation. But I think the complicating
factor as we discussed is you also have
this push factor on the labor side
where, you know, again, if a bunch of
the free cash flow is getting freed up
because labor's share is going down and
suddenly you have AI coming in and
companies are saving enormously on, you
know, their headcounts or whatever, then
that could maybe help keep valuations
high, but, you know, it does seem like
does seem like a good thing to be
looking at. It's interesting. I forget
which conversation it was, one of our
million AI-related conversations, but we
were talking about like what are the AI
winners going to be and they're winners
in the sense that they've massively
become more productive. And maybe it'll
be European chemical companies or drug
discovery companies, etc. and so forth
who are not building models, but just
strictly taking advantage of these
potential productivity gains. And maybe
if you look at the stock market this
year,
you could sort of tell that story in the
specific sense that the US is
underperforming. The US where we build
all these models are built in the US and
they're spending like crazy and the US
markets have been sort of mediocre for a
while and everywhere around the world is
doing much better. Maybe we're starting
to see these sort of like some of these
some of these distributional shifts
underway just in terms of who reaps the
reward from all this activity. I mean, I
think it's a really good thing to think
about. I would also argue that there may
be some other factors keeping
>> other factors. There are other factors.
the US equity risk premium fairly high
at the moment.
>> definitely uh there are definitely other
factors. All right, shall we leave it
there?
>> Let's leave it there. This has been
another episode of the Odd Lots podcast.
I'm Tracy Alloway. You can follow me at
TracyAlloway. And I'm Joe Weisenthal.
You can follow me at The Stalwart.
Follow our guest, Jonathan Heathcote, at
JohnHeathcote. Follow our producers,
Carmen Rodriguez, at CarmenArman,
Dashiel Bennett at DashBot, and Caleb
Brooks at CalebBrooks. And for more Odd
Lots content, go to
bloomberg.com/oddlots
for a daily newsletter and all of our
episodes. And you can chat about all of
these topics 24/7 in our Discord,
discord.gg/oddlots.
And if you enjoy Odd Lots, if you like
it when [music] we talk about macro
variables and the stock valuation
process, then please leave us a positive
review on your favorite podcast
platform. [music] And remember, if you
are a Bloomberg subscriber, you can
listen to all of our episodes absolutely
ad-free. All you need to do is find the
Bloomberg channel on Apple Podcasts
[music] and follow the instructions
there. Thanks for listening.
>> [music]
[music]